Alfredo Loera III
Varun Mehta
Saron Hailemariam 

Story Pitch for Final Project: Drug overdose deaths over the years 

For our final project we would like to display information on drug overdoses in the United States and how the numbers of occurrences have risen over the years.
What is a drug overdose? A drug overdose is when someone takes a toxic/poisonous amount of drugs or medications, not all drug overdoses are fatal but can do serious harm to the user. 
Why this topic? Living in the state of Washington and being in the city of Seattle, the numerous amounts of drug overdoses that are reported in the news and open use of paraphernalia in our area is very common. The problem doesn’t just happen in Seattle but as well as all around the state such as Yakima, Spokane, Tri-cities and many other counties throughout, also in every state throughout the United States. Overdose death and injuries remain one of the leading causes of death and self harm, per the CDC, also per the National institute on drug abuse reports that over 96,000 people die every year from drug overdose and opioids are a factor in 7 out of 10 overdose deaths and since 1999 drug overdoses have taken the lives of more than a million people. 
Why is this data important? Drug overdose is a fairly new topic and has only been recorded since around 1999, there are many different ways to present data for this topic. We can break down the data by age, sex, and per state as well as fatal overdoses and non-fatal. The numbers of reported cases continue to increase year after year, for example: “preventable opioid overdose deaths increased 41% in 2020 and another 18% in 2021. The 35- to 44-year age group is experiencing the most opioid overdose deaths – 20,137 – a 20% increase from 2020, and a 73% increase since 2019. Currently, 71% of preventable opioid deaths occur among those ages 25 to 54, and the number of deaths among individuals 55 and older is growing rapidly. Few opioid deaths occur among children younger than 15. Seven out of 10 preventable opioid overdose death victims are male, 53,992 compared to 21,793 female deaths in 2021. However, since 1999, female opioid overdose deaths have increased at a faster pace than male deaths – 1,608% for females versus 1,076% for males”. There are many categories that can be made for this topic, the data is readily available and published by credible sources. 
While speaking with my team about which topic to choose we came to an agreement for this topic and we all feel that this topic is very important to show information with not just words but with visuals as well. This topic I hold a bit closer than others given that I have first hand experiences with others who have overdosed during my time as a Firefighter/EMT, I have seen how it devastates families and communities, I have seen fatal and nonfatal occurrences, It is a topic that I would like to present to others and learn about. 
